API Testing
What is API?
API is a combination of a set of routines, protocols, and supporting tools used in the background to create a connection between your application UI and backend server to exchange information.

why UI is needed even when API are faster ?
API tests are faster and validate backend logic, but UI tests are needed to validate the actual user experience.
Even if APIs work perfectly, issues can still happen in the UI layer—like broken buttons, incorrect data binding, navigation failures, or JavaScript errors.
UI tests ensure that all layers (frontend + backend) are correctly integrated and the end user can successfully complete workflows.”

What is the difference between API, Web Service and Microservice ?
Web Service
Web service is a type of API that is going to run over the internet or web.

Micro Service
Microservice is a tiny API that we are going to use within the application to communicate and share the information between different components of the application.

What is API testing? Why is it important?
API testing is a type of software testing that involves testing APIs directly without using application UI.

Benefits of API testing ?
Early issue detection
Faster execution compared to UI
Completely independent from UI changes
Broader test coverage.
API testing is automation friendly.
Only API testing is enough to release the product ?
NO

Popular API architectures ?
SOAP
REST
GRAPHQL
SOAP (simple Object Access Protocol)
SOAP services mainly rely on XML format to provide messaging services. Each SOAP service is mainly used for POST requests to send and receive the information.

POST /webservice HTTP/1.1 Host: example.com Content-Type: text/xml; charset=utf-8 Content-Length: length

<soap:Envelope xmlns:soap="http://www.w3.org/2003/05/soap-envelope"> soap:Header/ soap:Body 12345 </soap:Body> </soap:Envelope>

<soap:Envelope xmlns:soap="http://www.w3.org/2003/05/soap-envelope"> soap:Header/ soap:Body Bharath Reddy Senior SDET </soap:Body> </soap:Envelope>

REST (Representational State Transfer)
RESTful services mainly use JSON format instead of using XML to exchange the information. RESTful services will use different HTTP methods to perform different types of operations. Like GET, POST, PUT, PATCH and DELETE

POST api.example.com/users/12345 HTTP/1.1

{ "role" : "QA" } Host: api.example.com Accept: application/json

Response: { "id": 12345, "name": "John Doe", "email": "johndoe@example.com" }

GET - when we want to search and retrieve existing data from the server POST - when we want to store new information within the backend server PUT - when we want to update the existing information from the server PATCH - when we want to modify part of the information or part of the record DELETE - when we want to delete the information from the server

GRAPHQL
GraphQL is going to allow us to send a request from the client to retrive specific data. So it is going to reduce over-fetching and under-fetching of the data.

POST /graphql HTTP/1.1 Host: api.example.com Content-Type: application/json

{ "query": "{ user(id: "12345") { name, email } }" }

Response: { "data": { "user": { "name": "John Doe", "email": "johndoe@example.com" } } }

*** How to validate RESTful services?

 API Requirements ?
** Requirements to be collected from our developer to send the request ?
* Purpose of API request or functionality of API ?

* Request type means what kind of request it is:

GET
POST
PUT
PATCH
DELETE
* Request URL : Request URL contains: (Example: GET https://api.amazon.com/{category}/{product}?price<=50000 )
base URL : https://api.amazon.com (the server URL that is constant for each and every request)
endpoint : /{category}/{product}?price<=50000 (inside the server, where exactly is the actual information available?)
path parameters : {category} ,{product} (the data that is changing dynamically within the endpoint)
query parameters : ?price<=50000 (starts with a question mark to filter the search results coming from the backend server)
* Request body or payload : The data that we want to store within the server are the data that you want to update within the server. { "name":"bharath", "email":"bharath@test.com" }
* Authorization and authentication

Authentication is all about "Who are you?"
Authorization is all about "what you are allowed to do?"
Just like UI, there are different authorization mechanisms we can implement while building the APIs.

1.No Auth : No authorization required. It's an open API.
2. Basic auth : Access the data through basic authorization like username and password.
3. API Key : Unique key generated by the developer along with a unique value that needs to be used to access the information from the server.
4. Bearer token or JWT token : Unique token generated by the developer to access the information based on the user roles and permissions along with Expiry date
5. OAuth : Open Authorization => What is all about maintaining additional security by adding additional layers. In OAuth, the user is going to get a consumer key and secret along with an access token to generate the temporary bearer token. Through that temporary bearer token, we can access the information.
* Request Headers : Request headers are nothing but the additional meta data to be shared along with the API request. { "Content-Type": "application/json", "Accept": "application/vnd.github.v3+json", "Authorization": "Bearer " }

** Requirements to be collected from our developer to validate the response ?

*Response Code or Status Code : Response code is all about the unique number generated by the server every time a request is completed. Based on the response code, we can understand the status of our request.
1XX => Informational Codes (processing) 2XX => Symbol of success. (200-OK ,201-Created ,204-No Content) 3XX => Redirect Status Codes 4XX => Client-side error. (400-Bad Request , 401 - Unauthorized , 404 - Not Found , 422 - Unprocessable Entity ) 5XX => Server-side error (500 - Internal server error. , 502 - Bad Gateway , 503 - Service Unavailable , 504 - Gateway timeout )

* Sample Response Body GET https://api.amazon.com/mobiles/iphone16?price<=50000
{ "mobiles" :{ "product":"Iphone 16", "price": 49999, "RAM" : "16Gb" } }

* Schema of the API response Schema: meaning the nature of the data that we are expecting within the response. "mobiles" : object "product":string "price":number "RAM":string

* Response headers "session-id" : "dgjhwgfdrwq4352367512"

* Maximum time it can take to give us the response ResponseTime : 2 sec

* Error validations and error handling For each and every invalid user request, what kind of outcome or what kind of error message are we expecting from the server, along with the status code.

* Cookies (If applicable) The data or the information that will be downloaded and shared with the user along with the actual response every time we are sending the request

